---
id: 1001 
title: "One Giant Red Flag, Folded Into A Book"
date: 2022-12-06T18:16:50+00:00
author: rechelon
layout: post
permalink: /2022/12/6/giant-red-flag
hidden:
  - 0
categories:
  - 'Reviews'

---
<p class="wp-caption-text">
This text is available as a zine <a href="http://rechelon.github.io/wp-content/uploads/cina.pdf">formatted for printing</a>.
</p>

<div class="source-info">CW: lengthy and detailed discussion of abuse, rape, stalking, and apologia for such</div>

<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Let’s be clear from the outset: Conflict Is Not Abuse is not even remotely the same thing as the sentiment or thesis that “conflict is not abuse.” Much of the success Sarah Schulman’s book has seen is the result of people wanting a defense of the latter thesis and assuming her appropriation of the pre-existing phrase means the book’s content follows whatever their own motivations and approach to that distinction is. I will refer to Schulman’s book by the acronym CINA throughout this review specifically to avoid such a default association and emphasize the ways in which CINA is </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">not</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> an appropriate or productive illustration of the differences between conflict and abuse (a distinction it barely touches and handles inaccurately), nor a useful investigation into the origins of conflations between those two categories.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The first time I was recommended CINA it was by an old comrade and former coworker, a survivor of the green scare, someone I have a deep personal respect and appreciation for. The Left, she complained to me over coffee, has become too quick to cut people off, to leap into recriminations and bitter denunciations over small infractions. Ignorance of non-standard language or etiquette, to say nothing of complex history, systems, and dynamics, is quickly turned into an indelible stain of character. Those without a liberal arts education and other markers of class are gatekept from The Left, which increasingly collapses to nothing more than status games in the non-profit sector. And within such spaces those who flourish are those who turn every disagreement, harm, or conflict, however minor, into a point of perpetual hostility and fracture. Every small clique closes up the drawbridges. Every wound festers. Mutual unintelligibility grows and every issue of epistemology becomes a hotly political declaration of personal alliances.</span></p>
<p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Sure! </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">I said, </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">I think pretty much everyone agrees with that</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. Indeed such a surface characterization of the left (compounded by today’s particularly crude and protozoic social media tools) is pretty much universal. </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">But crucial and grave distinctions emerge in our analysis and prescriptions.</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> One can find squabbles for status on Facebook or preening over demonstrating the absolute perfect social justice language to be laughably inane while </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">also </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">supporting the recent paradigm shift to a world where the regimes of sickening peace that so many predators and tyrants in subcultural spaces depended upon for decades is eroded and counter-mobilization isn’t tamped down.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">My friend and I talked for hours, but our broad emphases could not have been more different.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">In her mind the central flaw of the Left was people’s tolerance or even taste for conflict and schism. In my mind the central flaw of the left was the inverse: a hunger for unity, and, as a result, a simple-minded avoidance of schism.</span></p>
<p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Indeed</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, I argued, </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">it’s precisely the Left’s pursuit of cohesion above all and an inability to gracefully accept rupture and separation that is the source of much intractable hostility</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. Instead of simply going our own ways, the Left sees any division as failure and so tries to force everything into The General Assembly or The Party or The Community – creating self-perpetuating quagmires in a blind faith that discussion can handle everything or that collectivity is a magical fountainhead of warm fuzzies. But the harder we attempt to press everyone into peace and unity the more violent and cataclysmic the inevitable splits. By trying to tamp down every fight and paper over every difference we create more division in total. Instead of stepping up to the hard fight to kick a serial abuser out of institutional power we defuse and avoid explicit conflict, pushing everything into hidden accountability processes designed solely to hold together The Community or The Organization, until the survivors get so exhausted and demoralized they quit activism or end up in a massive schism not just with the serial abuser but with the self-appointed overseers of accountability, even with the entire passively complicit scene.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">It’s a general pattern: the more a scene accepts separation, the less catastrophic the divisions. Anarchist circles and projects, for example, certainly have our disagreements, grudges, and lingering animosities, but the resulting conflicts, even when they get violent or fucked up, are at least rarely as devastating as the unending fractal of cataclysmic splits between factions of marxists who cannot ideologically countenance any sort of schism and so are overrun by them.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">In short, I agreed with the </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">title</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> of the book my friend so effusively praised, </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">conflict isn’t abuse</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, but I disagreed with what she seemed to have gotten from it. While there are some inane exceptions, we don’t have an epidemic of inflating conflict into abuse, we far more often see abuse minimized and marginalized as mere “conflict,” with struggles against abusers cast as even worse than abuse. And while normal conflict is sometimes unnecessary or defaulted on for bad reasons, I believe it is often good or even necessary in many situations to </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">embrace </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">conflict, and in many cases that can take the form of individuals cutting off contact or collectively boycotting (“ostracizing”). Yes, the insufficiently developed structure of certain contemporary communications technologies that still provide few options in social scope and context, leads to a lot of noise and posturing over trivialities, but this issue pales in comparison to the importance of tearing down the regimes of unjust peace and unity in subcultural communities that have long held up predators, nihilistic apathy and the old boys clubs that cultivate both.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">It’s worth noting Sarah Schulman repeatedly emphasizes in interviews that she didn’t write CINA to address abuse or #MeToo. And yet in practice the discourse around CINA is invariably drawn to such issues.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The most pernicious and loudly prominent tendency among references to CINA are those who use it to declare that a given situation of severe abuse is merely “conflict” – and also, usually, to then frame those treating it more seriously as engaging in “abuse” </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">themselves</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> for their reaction. #ConflictIsNotAbuse, in this usage, becomes an opportunistic slogan for deflection and reversals, with a book only distantly attached, off in the ether, providing legitimization in a nebulous but authoritative way.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">It’s very similar to </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">The Tyranny Of Structurelessness</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> – a similarly notorious text that lives primarily as a slogan to legitimize any given instance of tyranny and bureaucracy or to dismiss out of hand any resistance and alternatives to such, as well as to shut down all investigation or talk of non-formalized bottom-up strategies for dealing with informal power. The particulars of the text are less important than the assumed canonicity and unassailability of its title. Few fans invoking the title of the text have actually read the thing; </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">they don’t need to</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">This isn’t to say that the wildly fucked up ends to which either text get cited are </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">unfair</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> readings or misappropriations of good texts. Make no mistake, CINA is ultimately </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">exactly</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> what it has been widely accused of being: </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">a jawdropping book of nonstop abuse apologia</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, a good representation of the ideological frameworks and defensive narratives of many abusers and their defenders. The array of horrid ends to which CINA is widely leveraged may not always be direct reflections of the text, but they do inexorably derive from it.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Just as it’s important to be fair and note her repeated dismissals that she wasn’t writing about abuse, it’s also important to provide the context that Schulman was, according to several publicly posted and widely shared accounts of fellow activists, run out of Toronto for abusing and stalking an ex, repeatedly violating boundaries and even showing up at her house. When she writes things like “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Resistance to shunning, exclusion, and unilateral control, while necessary, are mischaracterized as harm</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">,” she’s quite openly attempting to cast her own personal history of violating requested boundaries as morally necessary </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">resistance</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> rather than abuse. This context is critical and clearly drives everything in CINA, which </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">repeatedly to the point of cringe comedy </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">inserts asides about how such stalking and boundary violation isn’t abuse, but is even morally obligatory, all while casting someone refusing to answer your calls as essentially The Real Abuse.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Yet I am not here to provide one more sweeping rhetorical denunciation of Schulman and her grotesque book but an autopsy. </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">How</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> specifically does CINA function towards the ends of abuse apologia? Why might a few reasonable and even valorous people find it sympathetic?</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">CINA invites the reader to consider the many situations everyone on the planet has experienced where someone doing bad things sees (or rhetorically frames) themselves as grievously harmed by minor acts, including the resistance or self-defense of those they’re harming. Since this is a very broad and sweeping category readers can insert pretty much whatever they like into this picture. After all, it’s a common enough experience in the most abstract sense; we’re all familiar with crybullies who will claim the smallest misstep is cataclysmically harmful and then frame any sort of resistance to their claims as further grievous injustice. CINA sweepingly postulates that in all these cases the bad-doer sees themselves as the victim because they have little experience dealing with self-criticism, self-doubt, and personal change and so fear collapsing entirely in the face of engagement, choosing to lash out instead.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">I want to be clear: instances of this can certainly occur!</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The trap is that this explanation can be slapped over almost </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">any situation</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">… including criticism of CINA. The credulous reader is enthused by the sense of support they get from the text regarding particular harrowing situations in their own social life. Whenever Schulman’s language gets dicey they just remember that one time someone was out-of-pocket online (eg comparing reposting a journalist’s copyrighted photo to rape or calling giving neighbors food racist). But increasingly the psychological narrative explanation applies to everything, and so must reflect Deep Truth. It becomes a hammer that can strike at anyone’s umbrage with you, all the more so if they have little interest in handholding you endlessly but instead just want you to fuck off and stop bothering them. And so when legions of survivors recoil in horror and denounce CINA as abuse apologia, there’s a ready-made explanation for their </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">hysteria</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">This potent appeal conjoins with the title into a readymade deflection: </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">okay, sure, the text could maybe do with more caveats that in various places the author isn’t saying X when she says something that could be construed as X, but it’s not on her to explore in depth what constitutes abuse rather than conflict. She’s just doing one half of the work</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">And finally, the favorite defense of Schulman herself: the book is just a grab bag of random ideas, not a formal academic thesis, and is meant to be charitably approached like a jumble of half-finished thoughts mumbled in a bar. Whatever the merits or demerits of this approach, CINA has reached such cultural pervasiveness because it does in fact functionally make a single argument and it’s one a lot of people want to hear: </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">The people accusing you of abuse are in fact the real abusers because it’s not like you repeatedly beat anyone, but they ostracized you and refused to return your calls, and that’s honestly the worst thing possible.</span></i></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The lazy way to denounce CINA is to list some extremely horrible or scandalous pull-quotes at the extremes of this and then just point to them and go “holy shit” (believe me, we’ll do that) but I want to talk concretely about some straightforward mistakes in CINA’s overall conceptual analysis, the values it assumes, and how they build on one another. There are three core mistakes Schulman makes:</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">1) Centering community, collectivity and existing relationships – as opposed to individual agency – as valuable in-and-of-themselves and the fountainhead of solutions.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">2) Ridiculously overestimating the utility or potency of verbal discussion, and prioritizing maintaining communication rather than embracing free association.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">3) Treating refusal to talk as itself abusive, or at least shockingly severe harm, rather than something not only often pragmatically necessary but core to and inextricable from individual agency.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The end result of these mistakes (and a variety of reinforcing ones) is the diminishing of actual abuse into the category of conflict by shifting the focus of critique upon survivors and others who set boundaries around communication and association.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman’s explicit diminishment of actual abuse is important, as are her extremely reactionary narratives about survivors and false accusations, but such are the </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">product </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">of a certain logic that must be explored in depth to be refuted. Along the way I will not in the slightest respect the tissue-thin pretense that CINA is a book merely about conflict and not abuse.</span></p>
<h3><strong>Community Over Individual Choice</strong></h3>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman, like a lot of leftists unfortunately, really passionately believes in a phantasm called “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">community</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” and has this kind of background assumption that </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">togetherness </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">is both what we’re all obviously striving for and is also basically a fountainhead of magic that can solve anything. She just takes it for granted that anyone reading would recognize “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">relationships</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” hold innate value </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">in themselves </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">above the freedom of their constituent individuals, and she also believes that The Community should be the primary agent and sovereign involved in resolving a conflict. In short, community is the </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">goal</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, the </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">means</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, and the </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">subject</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. As she puts it at the outset:</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“At the center of my vision is the recognition that above all, it is the community surrounding a Conflict that is the source of its resolution. </span></i><b><i>The community holds the crucial responsibility</i></b><i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> to resist overreaction to difference, and to offer alternatives of understanding and complexity. We have to help each other illuminate and counter the role of overstating harm instead of using it to justify cruelty. I suggest that we have a better chance at interrupting unnecessary pain if we articulate our shared responsibility in creating alternatives. Looking for methods of </span></i><b><i>collective problem-solving</i></b><i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> make these destructive, tragic leaps more difficult to accomplish. People who are being punished for doing nothing, for having normative conflict, or for resisting unjustified situations, need the help of other people. While there are many excuses for not intervening in unjust punishment, that intervention is, nonetheless, essential. Without the intervention that most people are afraid to commit to, this escalation cannot be interrupted.”</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> [emphasis added]</span></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">There’s a world of horrors Shulman is stuffing under anodyne phrases like “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">normative conflict</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” or “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">resisting unjustified situations</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” but, again, we’ll get to all that. However it’s important to note that the “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">tragic</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">escalation</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” she’s concerned with here is explicitly laid out as that of refusing to talk to someone or attempting to organize a boycott of them, both characterized by the severing of relationships. Such is something Schulman repeatedly treats as unimaginably dire and endlessly compares or equivocates with things like racist police violence and Israel’s genocidal project in Palestine. Schulman’s position is that if you see someone refusing to talk to a shitbag or folks cutting ties over associating with said shitbag, you have a </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">moral obligation</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> not just to proactively violate any requested boundaries against contact (eg stalking and harassing them to get them to talk to said shitbag) but to aggressively mobilize with other “community” members to band to the “aid” of the shitbag, to force other people into association with said shitbag and defeat any boycott or deplatforming that might otherwise result from a wider awareness of his shitbaggery. Again, Schulman presents this sort of response as a </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">moral imperative</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. And she seems to think this </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">isn’t happening </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">and needs to.</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“One problem here is how to intervene with a person who is overstating harm, hiding behind technology </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">[note: by this she explicitly means anything from preferring email over phone calls to blocking someone]</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, shunning or otherwise escalating… This is the structure behind every successful piece of non-violent progressive political action:</span></i></p>
<ol>
<li><i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> Scapegoated people cannot be made to stand alone.</span></i></li>
</ol>
<ol start="2">
<li><i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> Community needs to move towards negotiation.</span></i></li>
</ol>
<ol start="3">
<li><i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> More and more people have to join in together to create change.</span></i></li>
</ol>
<ol start="4">
<li><i>The conversation is not over just because an escalator insists that it is.”</i></li>
</ol>
</blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">But this is </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">already </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">the blueprint of pretty much every attack on a survivor in subcultural spaces. A mob is rallied together to overwhelm someone and deny their basic agency as an individual, to deny them the autonomy to set boundaries and choose who they associate with, to </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">impose </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">an endless conversation against their wishes, to </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">re-establish </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">relationships to some degree, rather than permit them to escape.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Indeed one of the most constant critiques survivors make is that Leftist and subcultural spaces prioritize the maintenance of “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">The Community</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” over the freedom of the survivors.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">No one wants to sacrifice their own relationships and personal social capital or disrupt the overall social network and so the interests of an abstract “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">The Community</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” are leveraged to keep abusers while aggressively mobilizing against the disruptiveness of survivors. Even when the abuser in question is a literal admitted child molester (as infamously occurred in the Portland IWW), his friends selfishly don’t want to lose the benefits of their relationships with him and so when the parent and a pile of survivors of child sexual assault demand his exclusion from an organization and radical events (to say nothing of his frequent role providing childcare at meetings) they were framed as aggressors against the social peace tearing apart “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">The Community</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” (hurting the organization’s reputation, harming “the work”, destroying relationships, violating procedures for endless formal discussion, etc). Because what’s really (selfishly) valued is </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">social peace</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> rather than individual autonomy, better social norms, or the liberation of survivors. Anarchists have endlessly written about this over the last two decades:</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“In the most extreme cases, accountability processes will be initiated against the explicit wishes of survivors, as an attempt to legitimize the perpetrator in the eyes of others. The pretence of making it a “community issue” allows the false supporters to not only take control out of the survivors hands, but also to portray survivors who refuse to cooperate with their own disempowerment as a barrier to accountability.“ (Betrayal: A Critical Analysis of Rape Culture In Anarchist Subcultures, 2013)</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">“Transformative justice processes” have widely become not one tool among many that survivors could pick as suits their needs and evaluation of a specific context and perpetrator, but a hidden cellar into which survivors can be reliably forced by organizations and milieus – by “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">The Community</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” – to contain their disruptiveness, often aggressively sticking them back into the hands of their abuser’s mind games, threats, traumatic memories, and exhausting lies. Like a small town delivering an unruly wife in town square back into the containing box of her husband’s house with a few token stern words to him, the point is to “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">repair the damage</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” to “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">The Community</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">,” not the survivor.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The playbook is historically consistent and widespread across subcultures and ostensible politics: form ranks around the abuser and collectively bully any survivors demanding his exclusion or honestly really anything. Requests that he leave her alone, sharing what he did to warn other people to stay away, much less mobilizing grassroots social boycotts of him, are treated as high treasonous crimes against “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">The Community</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” and the web of </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">relationships </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">that comprise it.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">However in practice the sheer self-interest of these machinations is pretty transparent. In the face of a declaration that someone was abusive, folks mobilize to defend their friendships, social capital, and the broader social order threatened by the survivor often without any sort of pretense (as well as to crack down on any chance they themselves might face negative consequences one day). And when moral arguments are grasped at to defend the maintenance of various relationships, it is usually a jumbled, reactive, contradictory affair.&nbsp;</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">What’s relatively novel about CINA is the way it attempts to provide a coherent unified moral argument to reject personal boundaries (“avoidance”) and grassroots boycotts (“shunning”) entirely. This is what makes the book so uniquely dangerous as a rallying document for abuse apologists. But it </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">also </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">makes it a fascinating artifact because, in so doing, Schulman leverages the collectivist values unfortunately already popular among leftists to shockingly extreme conclusions. CINA is nothing if not a systematic reductio ad absurdum of collectivism. If a Right Libertarian wrote it as a parody document of The Left we would sneer that it was a cartoonish hack job with takes no one real would ever make. And yet CINA is littered with sweeping statements that aggressively reject individual autonomy, to give just one example:</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“If someone wishes to alter a relationship, they must discuss it with the other person, negotiate the change, and listen to the other person’s account. There is no ethical way around it.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">One would hope that any reasonable person would instantly recognize this claim as ridiculous and abhorrent. Individual agency implies plenty of situations where unilateral alteration of a relationship is clearly licensed and no “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">negotiation</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” whatsoever is appropriate. If a friend or acquaintance reveals a sexual interest in me they have unavoidably </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">unilaterally </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">changed some aspects to our relationship, and I may reciprocate or not, but I owe them no </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">negotiation</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> in my response, which in turn </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">unilaterally </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">creates a change. If a friend asks to become fuckbuddies I don’t even necessarily owe them an </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">explanation </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">for my refusal. Relationships are not democratic communes.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Another obvious and salient example is breaking up with someone. The right of exit from a relationship is not up for </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">negotiation </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">nor should it ever be, if someone wants out, they’re out. Hell, I say this as someone in my youth broken up with via an “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">I love you too intensely and I’ve decided I don’t want to feel such intensity, please don’t respond</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” text, a maddeningly and painfully limited puzzlebox if ever there was one. Everyone knows that getting ghosted can suck, but a breakup is fundamentally a matter of individual choice and should not be something where both parties are forced into a </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">negotiation </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">by some National Romantic Relations Board.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">There are many situations of change in relationships in which </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">discussion </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">and even </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">negotiation </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">are quite ethically valorous, </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">sometimes </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">requisite on some level, but they are simply not as fundamental of moral priorities as individual autonomy. Having agency comes first. As such, there will always be many contexts in which there is </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">no </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">obligation or pull whatsoever to discuss or “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">negotiate</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” a change to a relationship. An employee, for example, is in a financial relationship with her boss and she can simply unilaterally declare that relationship finished at any time. If a friend of mine starts knowingly dating a cop or infamous snitch I do not owe them a discussion about their betrayal of our shared values or the risk they now pose, certainly not any </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">negotiation</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, I can </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">and should </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">cut all contact with them ASAP.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman’s language in even just the above betrays how deeply she sees things in terms of collectives, she speaks of “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">a relationship</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” as if it were a unified thing but there is actually no singular ontological object out there of “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">the relationship</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” that we are co-owners or constituent citizens of. There are rather always just individuals with different orientations or sentiments to others. </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Your sentiment towards me is not the same object as my sentiment towards you</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, they can interact but they are, at core, autonomous. Richly and delightedly entangled though we may become in friendships and love, we are still infinitely more individuals than some net collective entity. Even while the abstract simplification of “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">our relationship</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” might have significant utility as shorthand, it is just as ultimately ontologically vacuous as aggregate abstractions like “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">table</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” or “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">hand</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” – while useful shorthand in a lot of contexts, it describes no actual root </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">thing </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">in the universe and it is certainly not emergently autonomous as a new causal or moral entity beyond our individual minds and orientations. “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Radicalism” </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">is precisely about rejecting abstract conjured holisms and instead focusing our eyes on the </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">actual roots</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">It’s not uncommon for an abusive parent or partner to harangue someone for not “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">doing more for Our Relationship</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” in very much the same terms that Leninists will pressure you to sacrifice for </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">The Organization </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">they run or jingoists will encourage you to sacrifice at the altar of </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">The Nation</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. These are not real things but simplified abstractions that are invoked to obscure the real dynamics and desires at play.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Your internal sentiment and orientation towards me is entirely your choice – were it anything less you would be reduced in your capacity to even function as a self-reflective agent. Our sentiments towards one another may, of course, grow strongly causally intertwined, and we may indeed pick up strong obligations in various contexts to discuss, engage or inform one another of things that expand our awareness and agency. Communication is vital to consent just as knowledge is vital to agency, so there </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">can </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">be extreme situations where you have an imperative to convey vital information to someone when they do not consent to hear it. Someone with a hangover might tell you to leave them in silence, but if you see them about to pour mislabeled rat poison into their coffee you obviously have a moral duty to violate their request. But this is just as obviously not the same thing as a </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">general obligation</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> to each others’ attention and engagement. Nor does it rise to the level of a duty of engagement that should be enforced upon the two of us by The Community.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">It’s all the rage in The Left to treat “agency” as a kind of arbitrary compartmentalization that can be applied like a fractal, at any scale. In this lens collectives (from relationships to nations) are just as much “agents” as individuals, but there is a drastically important distinction that arises from the vast differences in how quickly and densely information can flow between neurons within a brain versus between conversing committee members. Put simply: the richness and depth of our thoughts, knowledge and experiences are generated far faster than language can ever convey to another person. We are an individuated species because the self-reflective processes that give rise to meaningful choice happen – by orders of magnitude – primarily in our skulls rather than in the thin bandwidth of communication that is able to pass between us. This is why </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">individuals </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">must be at the root of any “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">radical” </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">analysis; in the absence of actual telepathy or borg-like hiveminds, agency and choice are </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">only </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">properties of individuals.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">To maximize freedom thus obliges respecting the autonomy of individuals so that they can make their own choices rather than be drowned as mere components of some committee (or community) they are locked into. This is not to say that we always have no ethical obligations, I’ve noted the complexity at play and potential exceptions, but our primary lens and our starting point should always be something closer to the individual “right” of free association. It’s </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">imperative </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">that individual autonomy be preserved so that choices can be made at all, so that people can even just </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">think </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">for themselves, rather than be trapped under the barrage of inefficient chatter. Relations that are not actively and continually </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">chosen </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">by each individual can only suppress freedom in net.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">It can be worth questioning the absolutist framework of “rights” that this prioritization is often framed in terms of, but Schulman’s approach is simply to </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">reverse </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">the right:</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“What we have instead is a devolved definition of personal responsibility, which constructs avoidance as a right regardless of the harm it does to others.”</span></i></p>
<p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“Simply wanting to exclude… someone through forced absence is not an inherent right.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“The concept of “safe space” …is used by the dominant to defend against the discomfort of hearing other people’s realities, to repress nuance, ignore multiple experiences, and reject </span></i><b><i>the inherent human right to be heard</i></b><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">It’s truly hard to fathom a claim as gobsmackingly dystopian as a “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">right to be heard</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.” If Schulman recognizes that she’s declared an inherent</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> right </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">to ownership and control over another person’s brain, she’s completely untroubled by it. Again, Libertarians love to complain that The Left has a tendency to argue sloppily and make up “positive rights” to labor from other people (eg the “right” to a doctor’s labor), but not a one of them ever dreamed things could go this far. This is a right to abuse, and nothing less.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Instead of treating engagement as something to be pursued as </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">a general ends or instrumental goal</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, Schulman instead presents it as a personal obligation in all relationships and contexts. Even worse, it’s a personal obligation that must be enforced by a community. You’re not allowed to come to the conclusion that there are better things to do with your life than continue arguing with your ex; The Community will pressure you to continue to engage with them, because your ex has a </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">right </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">to your attention. The Relationship has rights. The Community has a right to perpetuation. And these rights stand above individual free association (which necessarily includes choosing to not engage with someone, e.g. to avoid them). This is what’s inextricably at play in Schulman’s framework. You have a </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">duty </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">to engage with other people, to answer their calls, to include them when your friends hang out, to </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">negotiate </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">every social action you take rather than making them freely, and this duty must be enforced upon you, which is equivalent to asserting that others have a </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">right </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">to your attention, a </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">vote </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">in your “relationship” in all situations as if it were a collective or nation.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman acts as though it’s self-evidently ludicrous to claim we have a right to shun but </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">of course</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> we have the right to shun. Good god, we have </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">nothing </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">if we do not have such a “right”! Which is to say in more clear terms: we, </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">as individuals</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, must have the core freedom to choose who we associate with and who we waste time engaging with. This is the very premise of individual agency: </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">choice</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. Not “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">voice</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” in a democratic assemblage, but </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">choice </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">in whether or not to show up or not. And, of course, choice in whether to </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">fork </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">the organization or group and convene a new one minus the assholes defending the child molester. Anything less is communistic tyranny rather than anarchy.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">For a sustainable world of rich connection, individuals must have </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">conscious choice</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> in their connections. We must be able to fluidly reorganize and reposition ourselves, building not just chosen family but </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">constantly and actively chosen</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> family. Schulman hates the term “family” (“the phrase “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">chosen family” makes me quake with fear</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">”), which, fair enough, and she juxtaposes this with friendship, concluding “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">a true friend has the conversation.</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">”</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">I will say that it is valorous that Schulman seeks a world of connection and engagement, I do as well, but this leads her to praise and seek to deepen precisely the “</span><b><i>unchosen</i></b><i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> character of inclusive and plural cohabitation.</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” [emphasis added]</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">There are, of course, real and important dangers to clustering effects whereby different communities or cultures might seal themselves from one another and there is an imperative to resist such cultural and epistemic closure in some specific ways by encouraging the choice of engagement, but Schulman’s solutions are slapdash and authoritarian: If some people </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">might </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">choose to cluster homogeneously, then </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">take away their choice</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">; force them into diverse pluralistic social relationships that they have no agency in reconfiguring or navigating. This “solution” is not the rich teeming chaos of cosmopolitanism but a nationalist and totalitarian caricature of it in which we all have assigned seating to meet some crude diversity quotas.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Nationalists complain that without collectively enforced borders the free association of individuals means their neighbor could sell their home to a foreigner and thus “impose” diversity upon them. Schulman’s argument in CINA takes literally the same form but with different ends. But nationalism isn’t just wrong in the ends of homogeneity, it is wrong in its means of suppressing individual choice. A world of random arbitrary relationships into which we are thrust and locked, and that we must embrace rather than exercise choice over, is not a solution to nationalist divides but rather has been a characteristic fascist wet dream since the time of Heidegger.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The whole point to cosmopolitanism and increasingly global connectivity is to give people </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">more choice</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. Bands of hunter-gatherers come together in large fairs, rural folks run away from small towns to giant cities, so many have fought for the online world we finally have, precisely so that people could have </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">more social options</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. This often looks like more avenues of flight: a battered wife stuck in a small village has fewer chances for solidarity or a place to flee to than she does in a big city. But it can also look like more options in terms of affinity. Cities (and the biggest city, the internet) are sites of constantly spontaneously generated subcultures from the magic of free association. This enables the generation of complex and diverse new cultural experiments, but it also means the erosion of those that don’t work for their members. That is to say, </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">diversity in some directions and not others</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">That part is critical because “diversity” is not a value in and of itself. Nor is “tolerance.” Such notions are liberal pluralist hangups very different from anarchist commitments. Sadly, Schulman is firmly in the grip of an analysis in terms of diversity and </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">difference</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">:</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“most of the pain, destruction, waste, and neglect towards human life that we create on this planet and beyond, are consequences of our overreaction to difference”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">But that’s clearly not the case. If one person wants to selfishly consume a limited resource and the other person doesn’t want them to, that’s a conflict in values totally separate from any position on or response to difference. The small child torturing small animals to death for fun in the backyard isn’t acting out some fear of difference/otherness but simply </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">not caring</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> by default about anything beyond their self. Perhaps they can come to eventually recognize and blur their sense of self with the common spark of agency in other patches of the universe, but a failure to evolve such an awareness is not by any means automatically the result of </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">fearing difference</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">And we don’t seek to </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">tolerate </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">the existence of evangelical christians, we seek to completely replace them by facilitating escape (and militant resistance). We seek to crush and exterminate bad subcultures and communities from national socialist black metal to hindufascism. To accomplish this means fluidly prefiguratively coming together in new social and cultural spaces with better values and norms in which we can not just breathe more freely but where folks can escape to. Social boycott dynamics are critical to this process to keep out the creep of everything that goes against those values. It’s not through some centralized politburo meeting where edicts are voted on that better social spaces develop, but through individuals freely choosing to associate with people who share their values and not with those who don’t. People can only truly engage when they each have </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">choice </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">in their relations, the freedom to escape, to be able to cut any tie and build new ones with anyone consenting. To build a more richly connected world on the whole we often have to cut away our personal connections with malicious nodes in the network. The anarchist project involves embracing this as a catalyzing individual process from the bottom-up.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">So in short: not every instance of homogeneous clustering or exclusion is pernicious. A child molester should not be tabling at a union’s family events. Immigrants new to a city reasonably desire to maintain many ties and commonalities. And radical subcultures of resistance </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">should </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">ostracize people for severely violating their assumed baseline of shared values and expectations.</span></p>
<h3><strong>Speech As Magic</strong></h3>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">If one half of Schulman’s moral appeal in CINA is a reductio of leftism as collectivism, its other half is a reductio of liberalism’s naive faith in speech as salve to everything. If people would only allow her to have a conversation with them, Schulman could correct “misinterpretations” of her and force them to come over to her perspective. CINA’s grand theory is that failing to critically engage and be critiqued by others engenders a kind of need for psychological stasis in trauma or entitlement that is the source of all closed groups and domination of the other. This is not a dynamic that </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">never </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">happens, it certainly describes many situations well enough, and I’ll engage with it more in a coming section, but CINA cashes this out as an imperative to </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">always </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">talk.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">In this frame </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">even fascism</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> is explicitly rendered nothing more than a frantic attempt to </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">escape </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">whose “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">antidote</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” is literally just “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">love</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.” (Like a boomer parody par excellence she’s really into the early 20th century pseudoscience of “psychoanalysis” and spends a chapter wishing totally discredited wingnuts like Wilhelm Reich could have just sat all the nazis down in a therapy session and thus solved everything.) In this frame “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">the courage to love</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” is literally “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">inexhaustible</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” magic that can solve any problem.</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“The responsible person who understands that all parties participate in conflict, says, “We need help.” If we really think that someone “needs help,” we help them. The claim “you need help, therefore I will compound your problems by shunning and bullying you,” obviously is entirely unethical, hypocritical, and socially detrimental.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">This shocking level of boomer liberalism extends from Schulman explicitly rejecting No Platforming fascists, to embracing inane IDW talking points like “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">the best answer to speech is more speech… the best answer to [negative] movements is more communication … what we need is more discomfort</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.” (41:10 </span><a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QiaaMMB0rGc"><span style="font-weight: 400;">here</span></a><span style="font-weight: 400;">) to absolutely laugh-out-loud analysis of social change:</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“If the powers that be had invited people with HIV into their halls and said, “We have a conflict here. Therefore we need to sit down together and solve it,” people with HIV would not have had to do civil disobedience, for which they and their supporters were arrested by the police. It was the shunning that made them have to do this. It was the immoral shunning that criminalized people with HIV.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Naturally she also opposes content warnings as coddling those damn college kids too.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">This is all so deeply liberal it’s gobsmacking. I already wrote a lengthy good faith </span><a href="https://c4ss.org/content/50151"><span style="font-weight: 400;">engagement with critics of antifascism in 2017 </span></a><span style="font-weight: 400;">handling every single argument against No Platforming extensively and laboriously showing how punching nazis is often the most efficient way to pursue the ends of a more connected and engaged world. Any liberal or conservative readers who have happened here and want the 101 should go there; I won’t insult your intelligence and the complexity of objections by simplifying and condensing everything here. However it goes without saying for anarchists or other radicals that Schulman’s takes here are deeply disqualifying.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">This sort of liberal stuff is obviously embarrassing, and tends to be what many leftists sympathetic to CINA will make exceptions around or admit the book goes off the rails around, framing it as like “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">well grandma’s gonna say some cringe shit, but nevertheless</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">,” but they’re not disconnected from everything else. They’re a critical link in the chain of Schulman’s argument.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Some of the most easily mocked passages in CINA arise from Schulman’s rants against </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">kids these days with their text messages and emails; why won’t they answer the phone when I call?!! How dare they take advantage of the possibility for explicit consent!!</span></i></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“Most Americans have cell phones now. They can return phone calls on the walk from the subway station to their apartment buildings, from the car to the mall. There is no reason why people do not return phone calls except for the power-play of not answering. It certainly does not save time. It is tragic that we have evolved a social custom that people need to email in order to ask for permission to make a phone call. Just call! Emailing to ask for permission to speak privileges the rage, Supremacy, and Trauma of withholding over the human responsibility to communicate and understand. I say, let’s get back to the first one hundred years of telephone culture, where people looked up each other’s numbers and called. The now “forbidden” ten-to-twenty-minute phone conversation could save the subsequent months or years of misplaced bad feeling. All this terrible loss, for nothing.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">It’s tempting to write these absurdities off as merely an embarrassing boomer moment irrelevant to the rest of CINA and move on, but I think it’s deeply illuminating to examine </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">why </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">she focuses in on phone calls and in-person conversations as positive conversation and is so hostile to not just text messages but letters. One can easily argue that text can strip away tone, but so too do phone calls strip away visual cues. In any case this would make such communication more limited bandwidth, but still a net positive over no communication. Yet Schulman </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">hates </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">text. As she puts it:</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“email and text are both unidirectional and don’t allow for return information to enhance or transform comprehension.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">There are many distinctions between text and verbal communication, each of which can be a net positive or negative in different contexts, yet the “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">unidirectionality</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” Schulman focuses on would be better framed as a matter of letting someone gather their thoughts, to think at the speed they need to, to be precise and considered, rather than rushed and provoked. Abusers love to corner people in inescapable ratchets of immediacy, denying them the space and time to formulate and clarify their thoughts consciously.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">At the very least consider the breathtaking neurotypical supremacy (and total lack of empathetic modeling of others) in Schulman’s characterization of someone preferring text:</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“one party makes a negative power-play by refusing to speak to the other in person.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Preferring a different medium of communication is thus transmuted into a “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">power-play</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“! And yet demanding someone allow you to corner them in a medium where they can ambush and escalate in wild directions and you can’t gather your thoughts to deal with these unforeseen maneuvers is somehow </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">not </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">one of the most classic power-plays?!</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Surely we have all seen the ways that politicians and demagogues use the real-time constraints of verbal discussion to derail, mislead, manipulate, duck, and counter on the fly? If we want to talk about unidirectionality or asymmetry, how about the asymmetry that a small amount of time and effort at bullshit takes far more time and effort to clear up? Verbal communication is deeply prone to manipulators barraging you with tiny dense attacks or deflections that would take pages of written text to break down in response. There are surely </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">plenty </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">of valid reasons to want to avoid speaking to someone in person.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman gives an example of a friend emailing her to cancel their lunch plans because of stressful major life commitments and presents that email as a trap:</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“So if I respond to your email with one of my own: “I am sad, but let’s talk on the phone before you leave”—that could cause the cataclysmic catastrophic end of all ends. Instead of just calling me, you can decide that I am abusing you. That I am pressuring you, guilt-tripping you… All your anger… converges on me and the horrible transgressing demand I have made on you by asking for us to talk. I am actually your friend, but you turn me into your foe. You therefore don’t answer me, and now we’re fucked up.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The assumption (or recollection) that such a response is even on the table speaks volumes about Schulman’s relationships and the patterns she’s personally established, but put that aside and note the supposedly innocuous example language she unthinkingly gives without a trace of self-criticism or self-awareness! “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">I am sad, but let’s talk on the phone before you leave.</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” The very first thing out of Schulman’s mouth is a declaration of her own feelings rather than any sort of sympathy with her friend’s life stresses. The second thing out of her mouth is an almost finalistic declaration of what </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">will</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> happen in a heavyhanded tone. Let’s. There’s no open “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">do you think you might have time to briefly catch up over phone after the chaos ends?</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” Also why on earth do a </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">phone call</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> when there isn’t space for a meet up? Why must a phone call happen in the brief window when you’re in the same city? There haven’t been long-distance charges for a glacial eon, Schulman.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">So much abuse is about trapping and monopolizing the target’s attention, feeling entitled to claim a chunk of their brain. The experience of being abused is often one of being forced into thinking about the abuser constantly, from trying to predict their acts to trying to follow the latest tangle in their proclamations. Abuse strips away agency by stripping away the capacity for the abused to think </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">for yourself</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, to think about anything else or think at all. If the abuser controls critical needs then everything is devoted to trying to turn yourself into a complex key that can unlock those needs. If the abuser besieges and terrorizes you randomly, you form your brain into a vast prediction net, trying to preempt as best you can every single avenue by which they might strike. Or you huddle up and turn yourself off, turn your brain off, to try and weather through things like an inert object. All of these are about losing your capacity for agency in a way that extends beyond any physical constraints directly imposed upon you. Abuse takes over your brain.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Sometimes the abuser acts so as to not have to think about you, to terrorize you into smallness and confined predictability, but sometimes the abuser is themselves driven by their own ravenous attention on you and the need to </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">make </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">you dedicate that same level of attention to them. This sort of abuser is never more happy than when their provocations force you into direct immediate raw unthought emotional tangles with them. They yell and yell until you finally yell back, and then they grin in glee because they </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">have </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">you. Neither abuser can stand your </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">escape</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> to any degree, which they read as a direct assault on them.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">There are many aspects of abuse, but abusers </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">feel entitled to your attention</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">I can’t emphasize this enough. Demanding that an ex listen to you, mobilizing The Community to </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">force </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">that ex to give you a monopoly over their brain is an abuser’s wet dream. It’s how thousands of accountability processes have derailed into an abuser continuously retraumatizing their survivor.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman, it must be emphasized, </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">has no argument</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> for why we should be obligated to give away our attention to anyone who wants it. What she has instead is 1) a fixation on pain and suffering of those denied control over the attention of their targets, and 2) the repeated assertion that having no boundaries is “adult” whereas saying no is “childish”. Mature adults talk things out in person, only immature </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">children</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> – or those so traumatized and broken as to be infantile children – would draw a line around their attention and enforce it.</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“In another example from other people’s lives, sometimes angry, supremacist, or traumatized people send emails commanding, “Do not contact me.” I want to state here, for the record, that no one is obligated to obey a unidirectional order that has not been discussed. </span></i><b><i>Negotiation is a human responsibility</i></b><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. Little children order their parents around: “Mommy, sit there!” When adults give orders while hiding behind technology, they are behaving illegitimately. These unilateral orders do not have to be obeyed. They need to be discussed.”&nbsp;</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">It would be trivial to compose a little passage reversing the associations, casting knowing how to draw boundaries and assert one’s independence and agency as the “mature adult” position whereas being caught under the boot of others demands to the point where you can’t own your own associations or attention as the “child” experience. But I want to reject the entire adult supremacist frame she’s appealing to.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">If the child often stomps their feet and declares “no” – </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">no, I refuse to give uncle a kiss, no, I refuse to get dressed to be your marionette at an event, no, I refuse to listen to your lecturing</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> – perhaps we should see that as an inspiring site of resistance by those most oppressed before they are ground down. Perhaps we should endeavor to be more like children desperately trying to assert their autonomy and consent as agents </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">who get to choose</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. Certainly the world “adults” have built and perpetuated by beating each new generation into surrender is a clearly sickening and grotesque one.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Even though I personally have made choices to maintain some level of contact, I vehemently support every abused child who walked away from their parents and never answered their calls ever again. Hell, I support children who </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">killed </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">their abusers. You do not owe everyone a path for reconciliation and negotiation. From abusers to even just wingnuts and inane time burglars, the best option is sometimes to just walk away forever. We have limited time on this planet, why spend it trying to repair every single relationship you have so far happened into?</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman somehow cannot even fathom goals other than the maintenance of existing relationships.</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“Refusing to speak to someone without terms for repair is a strange, childish act of destruction in which nothing can be won.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Liberation can be won. There’s a world of possibility beyond the confines of one given relationship. Opportunity cost is a real thing that is worth considering. That nothing is gained in </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">one specific relationship </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">by walking away</span> <span style="font-weight: 400;">doesn’t mean that a world of possibilities can’t be gained through the absence and negation of that relationship.</span></p>
<h3><strong>Rape Culture Narratives</strong></h3>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Now that we’ve covered the broad theoretical structure behind much of CINA’s abuse apologia, let’s get directly to how it cashes out. You want the horror pull quotes, I am chomping at the bit to provide them.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Guess what Schulman thinks of “no means no” and how she speaks of “accusations”?</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“Now when I hear “When a woman says no, she means no,” I know that that is too simple, because I have said no when I didn’t mean it. And I am a woman. </span></i><b><i>When I have said “no” there were times when I did not know that I actually felt “yes” and there are times that I did know that I actually “felt” yes. People do not always know what they feel, nor do they acknowledge what they really know</i></b><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. Sometimes we say what we think we are supposed to say, or what we are used to saying; we don’t give the actual moment a chance. Sometimes we just try out saying certain things. Consequently, making an accusation does not make us right, being angry does not make us right, refusing to communicate does not make us right. In fact, all those things could make us very, very wrong.” [emphasis added]</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">I tend to assume my readers have basic critical thinking skills as feminists but I’ve been surprised before that a critique left to the reader I thought would be obvious wasn’t to some, so let’s be laborious: yes, it is trivially true that what is spoken in a moment is not always a perfect reflection of someone’s full internal utility function. But our incentives align to try to make our proclaimed desires as true to our inner ones as we can. An external observer will never have anywhere near as good of access to your internal desires as you, so we are obliged to take your word for it because the other direction is a hellish clusterfuck. Moreover there’s an assumption here that in a conflict of internal desires in a situation there’s some deeper truth being obscured by an incorrectly triumphant desire.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">What is the fucking rhetorical purpose of going on in a book about how there are some occasions when someone who says no doesn’t mean it? Who and what does that kind of maneuver serve? If you go around saying “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">but did you know that some women have rape fantasies?!</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” loudly in public without a certain kind of studious contextualizing that’s not a bare statement of fact, that is a fucking </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">move</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Note also the direct slide from “no doesn’t always mean no” wheedling to the implication that “making an accusation” is often about caving to social pressures, refusing to reflect, and/or just </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">trying out </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">saying a thing. As if rape or abuse accusations just fall out of an improvisational scat singing session at a jazz club.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">If this is all sounding like victim blaming that could easily be mistaken for a bit on Tucker Carlson, you’re not wrong, Schulman could get a new job as a script writer for him:</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“There is a contemporary, quite visible, collectively agreed-upon, almost traditional social model of “abuse” where a man invites a woman to respond to his desires when she does not return those desires, nor has she suggested or advertised that she does. …But what if she was attracted to him and did show it, and won’t acknowledge that? And he doesn’t want to live with the “he hit on me” narrative… What he wants is the “I was attracted to him but I wouldn’t acknowledge it, so I got confused” version.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Flagrant justification by appealing to every flimsy narrative in mainstream patriarchal rape culture media that feminists have spent decades critiquing? You betcha:</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“In the movie, the potential lover goes, knocks on the door, says “Wait,” and the reluctant party waits.</span></i></p>
<p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“Listen,” she tells her. “I know that someone, your ex or your father or someone, told you a story about yourself. That you don’t know how to love. But I am here to tell you that it’s not true.”</span></i></p>
<p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Unfortunately, in our contemporary confusion, at the point where the other knocks on our protagonist’s door, they are a “stalker.” We are no longer allowed to drop by unannounced when things are fraught. She can’t call on the phone to deliver the monologue of persuasion with an open heart, because our heroine hides behind voice mail. She can’t send it by email, because it will either be deleted, or forwarded to thousands. If she has knocked, called, and emailed, she is now officially, in the era of overstating harm, a “harasser.” The person who fights for honest conversation that can heal, such a well-known and beloved character of yore, is, alas, no more. And so Ms. Reluctant never gets the affective reality, the skin, the voice, the tone, the eyes, the smile, the jokes, and especially the back and forth, the interactivity that reminds her of what it feels like to let someone in, the interactivity that produces a revelation that her future is not impossible. Instead, past pain dominates over possibility. To suggest otherwise is forbidden.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman tells a story about fantasizing about sex with a stranger she’s eating lunch with, reading that person’s actions as flirtatious</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“Is she innocent of being sexually suggestive or is she guilty? … If I attempt to follow up in order to discover if this was actually aimed at me, I too could be seen as a harasser; after all, this is a professional relationship. Human Resources could be called in to hurt me. Or, just as easily, my interest could be reciprocated. I have to be very, very careful. One false move and I could be the sad object of an outraged story on the dreaded grapevine: “Sarah Schulman came on to me. It was so inappropriate.” The story would never be “I liked her, I flirted with her, she understood me, and then I was scared I would be hurt like I have been before.” “</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The dreaded grapevine. Amid everything else I want you to notice how she just assumes everyone sees whisper networks as figures of dread rather than spaces for release and agency.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Also note how the possibility of strategies of direct and explicit consent is not even considered. Instead Schulman leaps off to talking about how “being accused of desire” is the real dynamic going on.</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“Being desired is not the same as being harassed, and we do not have to punish or shun the person who sees what is special about us. Just because you want me, doesn’t mean I have to hurt you. Especially if I also feel attractions that I don’t pursue for reasons of projections from my past. I don’t have to avoid you, ignore your call, refuse to return your email, or block you.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Again, this is coming from someone accused of stalking. I will say the sheer narcissism about what’s going on when someone rejects or critiques her advances is actually impressive. Schulman talks a lot of game about critical reflection, but she always lobs such towards everyone making accusations of abuse or choosing not to talk to someone. You get the impression she has never once critically self-reflected about whether she’s actually harming people by trying to force real time conversation, whether her demands and entitlements are valid and whether the folks who give her pushback might be rational and self-aware enough to be worth considering. There’s never been a valid reason to press the block button on Sarah Schulman and she’s certain there never will or can be.</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“Uneven desire is not a crime, it is not rude, it is not an assault or grounds for shunning or being hurtful. It’s just life and we can still be friends. For real. Even forever. But we have to talk.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Uneven desire is definitely not a crime or even assault, but how we express and act on that desire can be. And no, we absolutely do not have to talk about it. You do not have to talk it out with the person catcalling you on the street. You are not under any obligation to try to talk things out with someone creeping you out.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">You certainly </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">can</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. I’ve leaned into uncomfortable interactions, talked at length with people who had crushes on me that I didn’t reciprocate. I’ve repeatedly invested my attention and emotions in care and communication in situations where I judged communication likely fruitful and the cost to me worth the assistance to them. I’ve stayed up responding to multiple page drunk emails with no paragraphing sent to me at 3am because I knew my response or lack of response would strongly affect someone and I </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">chose </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">to get entangled in that mess. But I had no social </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">duty</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> to or absolute ethical imperative.</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“People who feel erotically towards forbidden objects—like those other than partners to whom they have pledged monogamy, or those who are the wrong age, who work in the same sexually prohibitive workplace, who are transgender, or sex workers, who are generally desexualized by the dominant culture, or who are “off-type” (as in not as butch as one’s femme identity demands in a partner)—can motivate them to hide feelings, even to themselves.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Note the language: “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">forbidden </span></i><b><i>objects</i></b><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” … “the wrong age</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">If you want to read more about Schulman and her takes beyond the pages of CINA about erotic thoughts towards people “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">the wrong age</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” you can do some googling, she’s been rather forthright and there’s a lot of survivors of childhood sexual assault with strong feelings about it. Suffice to say it resounds particularly badly in the context of her sneers about how deplorably </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">childish </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">it is to try and set boundaries.</span></p>
<h3><strong>Attacking Survivors</strong></h3>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman has in public venues deflected comparisons to #MeToo and calling out rape or abuse saying she was targeting something else with CINA, but this is pretty dishonest as she herself disparages “call-out culture” in the text and directly targets things like believing accounts of abuse.</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“We have developed these reductive modes like email and texts to accompany reductive ideas that are supposed to serve large social functions but are not based in human complexity… One of these is “Believe women!” We have this slogan in circulation because so many women are not believed when they tell the truth. But what about when they are not telling the truth? Are we still supposed to believe them? …What about when women say things that aren’t true because they don’t understand themselves, ourselves? Being defended, of course, is rarely deliberate when we are not self-aware, self-critical, accountable, or psychologically sophisticated. Are others still required to obey?”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">These are almost exactly the same kind of snottily baiting rhetorical questions that Kristian Williams infamously wrote and had another person read aloud in an interruption at the 2012 Patriarchy In The Movement conference to gasps of fury from the audience. </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Are there literally no exceptions?!! Who will help the noble truth-speakers to fight their way out of the dogmatic chains of “believing survivors”? What if survivors are actually just fucking stupid and crazy</span></i><em><span style="font-weight: 400;">?</span><span style="font-weight: 400;"> (Sorry, “</span><span style="font-weight: 400;">not</span></em><i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> psychologically sophisticated.</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">”) </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">What if there’s actually an epidemic of folks deluding themselves in “victimology?” Hey, we’re just asking questions here. No need to get so upset.</span></i></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">This isn’t a sincere nerdy literalism that can’t process the existence of heuristics and counter-balancing emphases, this isn’t even remotely a nuanced exploration of the real (albeit rare) exceptions like false accusations and the complex dynamics and paths around such. This is a direct and intentional attack on even the most minimal pushes for solidarity with survivors and against patriarchy. It’s about constructing a narrative of equivocation and emphasized exceptions that can be dragged out in defense of inaction when your friend is called out again.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman is so good at the “there’s an epidemic of false accusations” game it’s honestly shocking she doesn’t already have a column for Quillette:</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“There are some women, often in the bourgeois class, who now perform that public event commonly recognized as “abused,” with ease: that the other person, male or female, wanted something from me that I did not want and so “I was abused.” It is a shortcut. They may select some details and omit others; they may rearrange the order of events so that consequences are reconstructed as causes; they may refuse to engage sequence, objective. I recite those few words: “I was abused” or “she was abusive” or “it was an abusive relationship” and it is immediately understood that I am right, and I am violated, and I am in danger and therefore deserving of group acclaim. While the other s/he is wrong, a harasser, s/he had desire and I didn’t, so I am clean and s/he is abusive. And if they wanted to straighten this out, or discuss it until more complexities are revealed, then s/he is a stalker, while I am clean.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Look, it’s absolutely the case that we have a limited vernacular for abuse and sexual assault. Not everything fits cleanly into categories and the dominant associations they have, and there are some folks who slide descriptions around. I know an individual that worked through a rigorous accountability process and went around diligently and painstakingly warning everyone they were a perpetrator of sexual assault for nearly a decade before the person running their accountability revised and was like “naw it wasn’t sexual assault, you were really scummy about trauma in a conversation about the act after, but you were studiously good about consent during sex” and the perpetrator fervently argued back that such </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">did </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">qualify as sexual assault according to their own very stringent moral code because it was harm interrelated with the act of sex. Categories can be complicated and fuzzy at the edges! I know someone who was threatened with rape and extensively gaslit that it had been done while they slept. “Abuse” doesn’t really encapsulate the rapeyness of this experience, but it’s not clear that “rape” constitutes a perfectly accurate term either because of the uncertainty that it happened. And yet when warning about the perpetrator, is the survivor necessarily </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">obliged </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">to divulge and explain all the excruciating gory details to convey the exact haziness of the placement between abuse and rape? Why shouldn’t they just collapse things into the very quick description “rape”? I have another friend who largely avoids identifying as a rape survivor in radical spaces because she finds that people are quick to collapse “rape” into a prototypical and ubiquitous image of date rape after a punk show rather than the far more involved and horrifying experience of years of child sexual assault she actually experienced and she doesn’t want to deal with their misperceptions or explain her trauma.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">You see my point: there are other ways to address the complexity of messy real world experiences and the utility of collapsing them into simple terms. Schulman </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">postures </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">as a proponent of nuance and complexity, but she’s completely one-sided.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">All her examples, no matter how ostensibly diverse, build towards the same fucking narrative that we live in a world where all accusations are automatically believed and so there’s an epidemic of folks automatically lying (to themselves as well as others) because of their own brokenness. Thus, rather than folks having a moral responsibility to help facilitate de facto restraining orders, coming to the defense of a basic freedom to say no and assure the autonomy of those in danger from abusers, The Community is </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">actually </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">morally obliged to do the inverse, to force people into contact and take on the role of invasive inquisitors.</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“Sometimes a person in our lives—a friend, a student, a neighbor or relative—makes negative insinuations about a third party (“He’s a stalker” or “She’s abusive”) and they want us to shun, be cold to, exclude, or in other ways punish this person. Our first responsibility is to determine if they are in physical danger from real violence. If not, then we ask to think with them about the order of events so that the complexities of the situation and how it unfolded can be revealed. It is unethical to hurt someone because we have been told to do so. We are required by decency to ask both the complainant and the accused how they understand the situation. And this, I truly believe, requires an in-person discussion.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">So let’s be clear on what this standard directly means:</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">1) No boycotts ever because every single person involved would need to have a personal in person conversation with the original parties. You can’t even heed someone’s warning about someone you’re about to go on a date with, at least not without snitching on them for warning you by bringing it up with him.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">2) Constantly re-traumatizing the survivor and forcing them to spend all their energy litigating for the smallest of possible concessions re boxing out their abuser.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Fuck that.</span></p>
<h3><strong>Minimizing Abuse Into Conflict</strong></h3>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">One common criticism of CINA is that Schulman never defines abuse. That is </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">approximately </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">true in that she handwaves and deflects around it, but not entirely fair. It’s somewhat reasonable and common enough to assert that it’s </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">impossible </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">to give a comprehensive description of abuse because people are horrifically controlling in so many diverse and novel ways and abuse is often a matter of sufficient degree in terms of control, which necessarily involves some “we know it when we experience it” imprecision. Further, it must be admitted that Schulman definitely admits some limited (albeit extreme and basic) examples of abuse. I think there </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">are </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">some contexts where CINA is flogged as the default abuse apologia manifesto where Schulman herself would admit, contrary to those invoking her book, that abuse is taking place. Although it’s always easier to offhandedly support a survivor when the situation is far away from one’s community or context.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">As CINA has grown in infamy I’ve increasingly run across people who’ve only encountered it secondhand or through shocking pull quotes of her abuse apologia. “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">I don’t get it, she’s so opposed to boundaries would she really be okay with someone raping her?</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” It’s important to correct such confusions: Schulman no doubt </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">does </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">think there are valid boundaries. She objects to abuse in the form of ongoing relationships of one-sided repeated physical violence.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The problem isn’t that Schulman minimizes </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">literally all abuse</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, it’s that she focuses in CINA on equivocating and downplaying around some types of abuse, and most emphatically (and seemingly personally) the “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">I demand communication from you</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” genres of abuse.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">To do this, Schulman cribs the authority of a single trainer, Catherine Hodes, giving a single training she attended, where Schulman breathlessly relays her dawning realization of inane ancient canards like </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“Abuse is Power Over and Conflict is Power Struggle.”</span></i></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">You can </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">feel </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman’s excitement as she relays scribbling these declarations down. </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Did you know that an action that at first glance, alone and in isolation, like yelling at a partner, appears abusive can be nothing of the sort when put in a wider context?!</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> Schulman runs with such banalities in the direction of mandating inquisitions into every accusation and pushing to dismissively redefine most everything as “conflict.”</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">How reflective this is of Hodes’ positions is hard to judge, and Schulman is clearly making some leaps from these starting points and ignoring other possible paths, but I think there’s another misstep at play that intersects with and reinforces every other horrible argument she makes in CINA.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">So far some will have judged me as unoriginal dogmatic attack dog of plumbline feminism, maybe only opportunistically slagging Schulman because she’s unpopular rather than horrifyingly wrong, but let me now illustrate a place where I have a nonstandard opinion a number of feminist comrades disagree with me on and how it is relevant to CINA: I think “power” is best understood as </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">a relationship of control,</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> not a resource ideally to be equally distributed, and thus there </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">can </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">be, however rarely, situations of </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">mutual control</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> and thus, technically, “mutual abuse.”</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">One has to be really careful with talk of “mutual abuse” because that concept is most often leveraged in the service of abuse apologia by way of false equivalence and a refusal to take sides or intervene. Indeed “mutual abuse” is almost always invoked to </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">avoid </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">shunning or otherwise sacrificing personal social capital. The survivor ever fought back or was grouchy at her abuser?</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> Honestly that relationship was soooo toxic who can really say</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. It’s disgusting and if anyone cites me here to legitimize throwing around the accusation of “mutual abuse” to discredit survivors I’ll hunt you down. Also, it is absolutely worth noting that many comrades I respect who work in domestic violence disagree with me here, take everything with a grain of salt.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Yet intense </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">mutual control </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">is clearly a thing that can exist – and much of the Left’s most horrific failure modes stem from failing to understand that. </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Equal </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">participation in a toxic democratic commune wherein </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">everyone is severely controlled </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">is not liberation, and this is very relevant because Schulman’s appeals to The Community replicate precisely this kind of evil.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman’s diminishment of abuse looks like retaining the classic “mutual abuse” deflection but re-labeling it “conflict” to water things down even further. Only one partner used physical violence against another? Yeah, well but the other partner had said callous shit so it was </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">just conflict</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">just a power struggle</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.&nbsp;</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“I believe that what these couples went through was mutual and therefore Conflict, not Abuse.”&nbsp;</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">And Schulman delightedly quotes her trainer:</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“All human relationships have power dynamics and that is neither good nor bad. Power is not the problem,” Hodes said. “It’s how it is wielded.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">But, as an anarchist, I have always fundamentally and vehemently rejected the notion that power is inherent and morally neutral, a noxious framing and dangerous use of language we have no reason to concede to just because it took off in the Academic Left after Foucault. I stand with anarchists throughout the ages who have always </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">rejected </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">power, from Russian anarchists declaring </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">all power is poison</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> to the Crass slogan that defined a generation of punk, urging us to </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">destroy power</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. Precisely what is radical about anarchism is our mission to increasingly and ultimately </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">abolish </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">power dynamics on all scales and in all cracks, not merely rearrange or equalize them.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">This sort of analysis is impossible to a fascist or leninist for whom everything is power and it’s only a question of </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">who </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">gets </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">how much</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. In such a blinkered frame a slave revolt is just a different sort of power, a different side getting to take control. But I think there’s a major difference between resistance and control: control diminishes agency and net options, resistance, by way of disrupting control, expands net options. Escaping from your abuser, fighting dirty against them, or even just blocking someone wasting your time, </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">expands options</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Part of what is stripped out and flattened away in Schulman’s sort of framing of “abuse” and “conflict” is an account of the ethics of conflict. Surely there are </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">positive </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">ways to have conflict. Two folks talking shit (sincerely) for decades about the other’s opposed political position can be neutral or even </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">positive </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">conflict. In contrast, one person dishonestly belittling another person’s qualifications in an activist meeting and the other person getting drunk and stealing their van and wrecking it is not a healthy conflict. No great acts there, severely harmful maybe, even deserving of sharp community response like boycotting, but also not </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">abusive </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">because they’re not matters of systematic control.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">But there </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">are </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">and can be, however rarely,</span> <span style="font-weight: 400;">situations of </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">mutual and equal systematic control</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. Two deeply abusive scumfucks who hunger for control can pair up together and create a spiral of mutually assured destruction if the other attempts to escape, while continuing to get their rocks off controlling the other. Predatory monsters do not always avoid one another, nor is there any law of physics assuring that one will have meaningfully greater material or social resources than the other. I know of two serial rapist and abuser occultists who eventually came together to run a rape cult, with as far as I can tell equal power and material resources, raping others even while reportedly alternatingly drugging and violating each other. </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">”Conflict” </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">is simply too cheap a word for what was going on in that relationship, nor do I feel their systematic controlling is separable from either’s history of abusing. Nor was I comfortable with attempts after they separated by folks in their subculture to frame either one as The Survivor to the exclusion of the other and even appeal to me to side with or help one I had known a decade before. Both needed to be thrown into the ocean.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">At play in this specific type of example I think is often a fetishization of strength in which neither can admit to the weakness of being afraid or hurt by the other, and so must each escalate in egregious acts of domination to prove their status as ubermensch to themselves and the other.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">But consider also a codependent couple whose hunger for security in their relationship, for assurances that the other will never leave them, escalating in mutually agreed upon norms of never talking to other people, openly surveilling each other, etc, until such a toxic environment has developed that both desperately want to escape the other’s lines of control and yet do not want to surrender their own. Threats of retaliation can escalate to enforce the ratcheting norms of control. Both can even fear for their life and desperately want to escape the other’s control while simultaneously hungering for control of the other themselves. They could even both be houseless without any disparity of control of physical resources. This is qualitatively distinct from </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">conflict </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">(no matter how negative) because of the sustained </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">systematic control </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">each leverages over the other.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">These are extreme and rare examples that may seem esoteric or contrived, but it’s an important point that people </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">can chain each other down</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, much the same way that in Schulman’s ideal community members would chain each other down; </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">you force me into engagement with someone today, I force you into engagement with someone tomorrow, and so on</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman is incapable of seeing the horror of her prescription precisely because she sees power as neutral when it’s equalized. But </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">power </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">is what is wrong. And it’s not a scalar (a quantity about which you can say nothing beyond </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">who has more</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">) but more like a vector space of relations where each point has </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">its own</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> relation to each other, containing whatever mix of control or resistance. We recognize there can be cults, polycules, and communes of roughly equal participation in extreme mutual control. When a circle of rabid maoists in the cultural revolution held each other down, there need not have been one apex abuser or even a dominant clique. Mutual domination </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">is </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">possible.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">This is not at all to say that we shouldn’t use basic sense, good heuristics, and conscientious evaluation of trust networks to evaluate situations, nor is it to say to that different proportionalities of control don’t matter immensely. Context matters, and a survivor who got a little “problematic” in resisting her abuser needs our full support. This is </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">not at all</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> a license to ignore differences in power and start labeling resistance as “mutual abuse.” Again, anyone citing me here to defend a claim of “mutual abuse” among their friends is almost certainly my enemy. But there is also practical danger in collapsing things to “conflict” out of a rhetorically defensive refusal to acknowledge even the remote possibility of mutual abuse.</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">““There should never be cross-restraining orders,” Hodes said. That’s like saying we agree to not see each other. Restraining orders should only be issued if one person is deemed to be a perpetrator and the restraining order is necessary to save the other from Power Over. It’s not a tactical strategy designed to prove a point. If both people are contributing to the problem, then it is mutual and therefore Conflict, and the intervention of the court is unreasonable.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Putting aside the state legal system, </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">surely </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">there are situations where two parties would benefit from boundaries from one another and neither trusts the other to keep their word without broader social enforcement. </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Both </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Jane and Jill </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">could </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">be controlling and put the other in fear for her life. But if one side of that is (as is most common) lying to try and defensively reverse things or leverage their greater social capital against their target… </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">it’s an objectively positive improvement to assist both boundaries!</span></i></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">If we as community and intimate bystanders somehow don’t know literally anything or there’s some dark and pressing uncertainty, if we </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">truly </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">can’t tell who the real abuser is, and both ostensibly want to escape the other… let’s fucking facilitate that! Why not just say neither is allowed to go to the other’s home or work? Why not share both accounts and asks around the situation?</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">If Jane is telling the truth and Jill is persuasively DARVOing, no “mutual agreement” to not see each other would be worth anything. If the community supports </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">both </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">boundaries, both acts of “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">shunning,</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” as Schulman would decry, then when Jill violates that shit at least Jane has folks ready to respond to help her. To be certain, it is absolutely a travesty and infuriating to allow Jill to go around lying or tell Jane she’s not allowed to come within a block of the co-op where Jill works, much better to figure out the truth, get a girl gang together and go smash out Jill’s windows, but when it comes to splitting the baby, “the community” enforcing each party’s protective boundaries is infinitely fucking better than forcing “conversation” and intervening to stop “shunning.” </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Our goal should be to facilitate agency and escape.</span></i></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Every survivor I know who wants their rapist or abuser dead does so because they remain an active threat to them or to others that dramatically constrains their freedom. Radical milieus are notoriously bad at enforcing anything like a restraining order (only surpassed in ineffectiveness or unwillingness to enforce by the cops and the state) but if a situation arose in which community members did, in fact, give any sort of shit about survivors and abuse, and we could assist in enforcing such, we should remember that it’s better to err on the side of mutual escape.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman wraps CINA up in the legitimization of “mutual abuse is impossible” and uses a focus on </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">inequality </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">of power rather than power itself as a way of working against escape from control. Like the worst liberals and leftists, she wants to </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">democratize </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">and </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">communize </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">control, make it a broad issue of </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">community</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, to bind each other in “conversation” and “negotiation.” But </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">power </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">is the problem, not merely inequalities of it, our ends should be </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">freedom</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, and language that doesn’t reflect that opens the door to dark shit.</span></p>
<h3><strong>Wild Comparisons</strong></h3>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">One of the most common critiques of CINA takes the form of just pointing in outrage to the comparisons Schulman makes between bottom-up individual choices to not associate with someone and institutional systems of exclusion and oppression. Refusing to talk to an ex or friends shunning someone is put in the same sweeping category as racist police violence, the suppression of queer activists during the AIDS crisis, and Israeli colonialism. Schulman makes clear she sees these on a spectrum of intensity, but the point of the comparison is to frame them as </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">categorically </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">the same, all explainable in terms of the same underlying dynamic.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Right out the gate she makes the following characterization</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“Eric Garner informed the police of the consequences of their actions on him, when he told them eleven times, while in an illegal chokehold, “I can’t breathe.” Michael Brown raised his hands in a sign of surrender and said, “Don’t shoot.” But something occurred within the minds, impulses, and group identities of the white police officers, in that they construed the original non-event compounded with these factual and peacemaking communications as some kind of threat or attack. In other words, these policemen looked at nothing, the complete absence of threat, and there they saw threat gross enough to justify murder. Nothing happened, but these people with power saw </span></i><b><i>abuse</i></b><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.” </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">[her emphasis]</span></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Of course virtually no cop in any such situation would even think to use that word, of course it’s deeply minimizing of the abuse to conflate the conceptual category of “threat” with the conceptual category of “abuse” as if all “harm” is conceptually the same, of course it’s ridiculous to remove the context of the state or treat it’s actions exactly as one would those of some random individual, and of course it’s grotesque to frame cop actions as actually being motivated by, as they say on the stand, “fear” rather than the myriad other emotions like outrage, anger, and disgust, that intersect with a general hunger for power and violent entitlement to it… but it’s imperative that we note the overall tendency towards flattening in every dimension to one metanarrative, one simple trick. The individual “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">fears difference”</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> and so “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">lashes out</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” rather than having a heart-to-heart conversation. That’s it. That’s all that could conceivably be at play to Schulman.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Now it’s certainly true that Israel cultivates a national victim narrative, and it’s certainly true that </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">some </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">cops grow paranoid and fearful, or at least remember to intone the words “feared for my life” on the stand, but this is so far and away from police violence being of the same nature as someone moving out and not talking to an ex. Similarly, the dynamics and mistakes that lead to oppression from the oppressed, when that happens, take place in a vast variety of ways well beyond Schulman’s narrative. To give another historical example, slaughtering the mixed-race children of Spanish colonizers during a few revolts was not something done because the oppressed “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">fear self-critical vulnerability</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.”&nbsp;</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">To flatten such into the same underlying psychoanalytical dynamic takes stupendous effort to avoid thinking. And, of course, it is wildly insulting to survivors.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Examples of this kind of flattening are everywhere in CINA. Even when Schulman thinks she’s introducing nuance she still thinks in terms of degree within a single dimension.</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“There is a continuum of pathology in blame, cold-shouldering, shunning, scapegoating, group bullying, incarcerating, occupying, assaulting, and killing.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">This is an array of strategies, but they are not necessarily </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">pathologies </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">nor approaches that should be rejected outright. Many clearly have contexts in which they are not just permissible but morally obligatory. And surely, even a pacifist who wouldn’t kill her rapist or fight the nazis can admit we should </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">blame </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">people who are to blame! Yet in Schulman’s warped boomer liberalism, even assigning </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">causal blame </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">is “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">pathological” </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">because it gets in the way of resolving conflict via conversation.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">This bundling of colonialism, police violence, and </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">refusing to pick up the phone</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> is invoked in a way that allows Schulman to perform intuition pumps across the </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">combined </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">bundle:</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“The mere fact that someone has been the recipient of group cruelty has no relationship to whether or not they have done anything to merit it.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">That someone has seen their land invaded by a foreign army surely has no relationship with merit, but when someone whines that they’ve been run out of multiple cities’ activist scenes or none of their exes will speak with them should we really force ourselves to blankly assume there’s no likely fire behind the smoke?</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">You see how the argument works: Rather than just outright declaring that accusations of abuse are at least as often wrong as right, Schulman conflates such with wildly different institutional and historical situations where we recognize accusations are in fact largely bullshit, then implicitly transposes this finding over the weird combined bundle back down to the specific.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">But in the real world where it is easy to ostracize someone for liking the wrong band or being cringe, it’s demonstrably </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">very hard</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> in virtually every subculture to get folks to ostracize someone over accusations of abuse or rape. If someone admits they’ve been ostracized by a scene over accusations of abuse, that’s a sharp indicator of the likely veracity of those accusations. Not perfect proof, of course, but a strong relationship nonetheless. If none of your friends will hang with someone because they each claim he was out-of-pocket and creepy, it’s rational and fair to likewise decline his invitation to a date. This adds up to collective shunning, an emergent boycott, but to outright reject “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">cold-shouldering</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” and “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">shunning</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” in-and-of-themselves requires the suppression of individual reason, it requires us to blind ourselves to data and refuse to think.</span></p>
<h3><strong>Engagement, Supremacy, and Humility</strong></h3>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">If there’s a single paragraph that provides the core thesis of CINA it’s the following abuse apologia narrative:</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“Over and over I have seen traumatized people refuse to hear or engage information that would alter their self-concepts, even in ways that could bring them more happiness and integrity. For the Supremacist, this refusal comes from a sense of entitlement; that they have an inherent “right” not to question themselves. Conversely, the unrecovered traumatized person’s refusal is rooted in a panic that their fragile self cannot bear interrogation; that whatever is keeping them together is not flexible.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">It is </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">absolutely </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">the case that reactionary and power-seeking perspectives are almost always rooted with a drive towards simplicity and fixedness, often including a struggle to retain a fixed identity, narrative, strategy, worldview, or other attribute. The need to preserve an arbitrary structure through curtailing fluid possibility is almost always what motivates domination. This </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">can</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> cash out as an aversion to self-questioning or being questioned.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">But there’s a lot that shouldn’t be extrapolated from that relationship.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">To give just one example of a common misstep from that point, the drive to find a simple and fixed </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">explanation</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> for something is not in and of itself a problem; in many contexts the truth or the best solution </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">is</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> fixed and simple. Indeed, where they are possible, having fixed highly accurate and tightly compressible maps of the world </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">enables</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> fluidity because they provide us more agency in our actions.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">But more pertinently, domination can come packaged as a drive for connection and “engagement.” The drive for simplicity and control often expresses as a domineering hunger to go out and batter down the other, to force them into a form of contact or engagement that shrinks their capacity to think and make choices. Plenty of stalkers turn obsessive about demanding “engagement” around some “misperceptions” or fixate on some narrative where they view themselves as simply trying to introduce critical self-reflection on the part of their targets, all to avoid critical self-reflection around </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">their own</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> infractions and abusive behavior.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Engagement </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">can even be transformative for the abuser</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, prompting them to self-reflect and adapt rather than remain utterly fixed, but adapt in a direction of ever more simplicity. An abuser can drag themselves into the mud, destroy their own life, while doing the same for their victim, all in the name of an “engagement” that increasingly constrains all agency and options for both parties. The mere willingness to question oneself, even radically transform oneself is not on its own a virtue or marker that one is not a danger.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">While engagement in some broad sense is a crucial component to the ultimate ends of liberation and in daily life, it’s a mistake to conflate all engagement as the same or always good in and of itself. A refusal to engage can be and often is necessary, even critical to the maximization of agency as a whole. Firewalls are necessary to keep malicious hackers out of our devices. When you know someone is attempting to threaten or blackmail you but they have not managed to relay particulars yet, the best strategy is often to simply refuse to read their messages.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The relaying and reception of information are not necessarily positive or even neutral acts.&nbsp; Someone coming up to you on the bus and inquiring if they can lick your ear is not merely asking for consent, their very inquiry </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">is itself</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> an action that can be violational. Life’s complicated that way.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman’s fixation on avoidance of engagement and self-interrogation as the root evil in CINA is overly simplistic to dangerous conclusions.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">So too, obviously is her analysis in terms of a sweepingly generalized “Supremacy Ideology,” a quintessentially boomer brainworm affliction where the problem is said to be not material relations of domination or even a desire for control, but rather merely ranking or valuing </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">anything </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">above anything else. One gets a whiff of the old hippie nihilists and postmodernists who accused anarchists of being “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">totalitarians</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” for our moral stance that freedom is better than domination. “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Who are you to say that anything is better than anything else?!</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” Of course, </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">specific </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">patterns and ecosystems of domination can be labeled supremacist as just a matter of fact, white supremacy and adult supremacy are clearly systems that value and empower an arbitrary set of people over others, but to generalize “supremacy” as some kind of problem in-of-itself, would mean labeling “antiracist supremacy” or “antifa supremacy” as a problem.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Indeed one fan of CINA, an admitted abuser, responded to my essay “Bad People” where I discuss among others, torturers at Abu Ghraib, with the breathless accusation that I was a “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">supremacist</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” because I implicitly judged non-abusers as better than abusers. Like, yes? Also genocidaires are worse than non-genocidaires. Everyone reading this is probably better than Hitler. I prefer good things over bad things? I prefer to eat pizza than a pile of dogshit. You got me, I’m a “supremacist.” Who could conceivably care?</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">But the discursive trainwreck of centering “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">supremacy!!”</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> on its own has grown in the wake of CINA’s publication and popularization, particularly around the kind of non-profit spaces where rich liberals make pastel slides for instagram and diversity trainings. It’s a good fit for them because it avoids talking about concrete and structural dynamics while at the same time pre-condemning any radical personal values or obligations. Don’t bother taking action because the core problem is just in people’s hearts, but also don’t believe in anything too hard because that would be supremacist.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The commonality across CINA’s focus on self-interrogation and its hostility to supremacy is an implicit commitment to “humility” as a virtue. It’s </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">not humble </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">to block Sarah Schulman’s number because you know she’s only going to waste your time, it’s </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">not humble</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> to think you could know better than The Community, it’s </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">not humble</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> to believe an accusation without a full trial. This fetishized timidity is the very heart of liberalism. Liberalism condemns taking action as </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">not humble</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, it condemns caring about anything consistently or radically as </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">not humble</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. It maintains the status quo and smothers individual agency by encouraging us to think that we can’t know anything and we dare not care enough to act on our own.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Fuck this “humility.” Let’s take it out back and beat it to death with baseball bats.</span></p>
<h3><strong>Rationality and Extreme Responses</strong></h3>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">All that said, it would be misguided and unproductive to treat CINA as though its every single paragraph were devoid of accurate statements. I may find such points inane, so obvious, basic, and uncontroversial as to be beneath discussion, but numerous fans of CINA evidently find them a breath of fresh air that legitimize or eclipse the rest of the book’s outrages.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Again, many people </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">do </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">opportunistically inflate minor grievances or harm in outrageous rhetorical terms. This has been particularly abundant in social media spaces since liberals discovered a set of anti-oppression heuristics and norms and collapsed them into overly simplistic codes, gamifying radical politics into a series of card-playing moves for clout. Someone still using a common word that was a few months ago deemed slightly problematic? </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Well I’ve never encountered such extreme violence! This attempt upon my life has left me scarred and disfigured!</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> We’ve all been long familiar with extremely bad faith actors or just those so naive that they literally do think such maneuverings </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">are </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">liberatory struggle.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Although note that such robotic inanities and disingenuous opportunism as now runs rampant among the liberal college and nonprofit set are not in the slightest bit explained by the psychoanalytical story Schulman tells. No one </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">actually </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">feels like every use of the word “bad” is a heinous transmisogynist microaggression because of some postulated etymology. No one </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">actually </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">feels deeply hurt that “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">straights have started appropriating the term ‘partner’.</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” And those individuals acting profoundly harmed by such are obviously, trivially engaged in a performance whose self-aware goal is control and status, not originating in some traumatized fear of critical self-recognition or whatever. There are plenty of vicious jackals and disconnected rich kids who have delighted in adopting social justice like it’s a game – even the most remote uncontacted tribes know this by now – but that has nothing to do with the heinous epidemic of people not picking up the phone when Sarah Schulman calls.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">It is also trivially the case that social divides and distance pose dangers, with different cliques congealing into “teams” that act as micro-nationalisms. Schulman is not wrong to point out that,</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“There is often a “cadre” of bad friends around a person encouraging them to do things that are morally wrong, unjustified, and unethical, because endorsing each other’s negative actions is built into the group relationship.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">It is absolutely true that people will often echo support and hype each other up into delusions or moral erosions. Being loyal is placed above being principled or accurate and the result is an opportunistic collective warping of reality and ethical values. It’s just that this group loyalty dynamic most often attacks disruptive survivors. And for obvious reasons. No one is a greater threat to community loyalty than a survivor demanding folks place anarchist values above their personal friendships with the perpetrator.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Yes, a general norm of </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">loyalty through thick and thin </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">and fierce hostility to those who betray this norm by ever objecting or nuancing against the group consensus is obviously toxic. And this </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">can </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">occur among the traumatized and oppressed, leading to unethical overreaction. To give an extreme contemporary example from a sympathetic subject at a similar sweeping scale to Schulman’s favorite examples: the YPG infamously promised to murder the families and </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">children </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">of ISIS members, before retracting the tweet in English. Fear of a pressing enemy and the fearful need for loyal community can seal us off from important corrections and let our moral compasses go awry, and it’s easy to imagine this being at the root of the above war crime. I’ve seen this happen in organizations, small circles and crews in endless contexts, albeit to much smaller missteps than slaughtering children. When affirmations like “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">you’re so valid!!✨</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” are the only permissible response in a social circle, delusion is inevitable.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">While any CINA fans reading this will have long before now concluded that I’m a hysterical extremist hostile to engagement and promoting us-vs-them epistemic bubbles, the reality is I am reflexively the annoying friend who pivots on a dime the moment they hear a bad argument against the enemy and must squash the bad argument and defend the enemy from it. When consensus process is being violated within an organization to silence a less popular member I intervene on their behalf. I have a compulsion around my friends to counteract confirmation spirals where a more extreme bit of rhetoric that diverges from facts gets reinforced as reality by the empathic hunger to affirm. I try to gently retreat from absolutist leaps of suspicion to numerical assessments of probability. Someone who, at heart, merely means something like, “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Personally I think there’s an 80% chance that abuse apologist is himself an abuser with the way he talks and the company he keeps</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” can in some cases slip into overemphasizing probabilities with the wrong rhetoric which in turn can get passed around and cycle into assumed proof. I try to encourage placing actual bets using numbers and things of value as a way to settle language down around what we actually mean. Remembering that our predictions or suspicions are probabilistic and never absolute in knowledge also helps soften any whiplash upon a correction when it turns out we are indeed wrong. I strongly believe that our first priority must be acquiring accurate maps of reality; we simply cannot have agency without such. And this means pushing back against bad instincts and cognitive biases.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Being a friend </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">does</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> mean often pushing back on a friend’s statements. But more often that looks like firmly holding them to account when they underemphasize something like “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">it was just taking off a condom, not Real Rape</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” and the murmuring of reinforcing affirmation starts from a room full of bros. This kind of pushback is not done by or in the service of The Community, but is necessarily an individual act and often a deeply divisive one that can involve burning friendships and damaging communities. Merely telling a friend “yo dude, that was racist” has no teeth unless unilaterally ending the friendship is at least a possibility. The option of “shunning” is, in fact, often a means by which to secure real engagement rather than comfortable dismissals.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">is also correct</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> that a solution in interpersonal conflicts can sometimes</span> <span style="font-weight: 400;">be taking space for deescalated deliberation:</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“The sudden, triggered reaction a) without consideration of choices; b) without looking at the order of events, motives, justifications, contexts, or outcomes; c) without taking responsibility for consequences on others and the escalation of Conflict; and d) without self-criticism, is the source of social and personal cruelty and the cause of great pain. Lashing out by overreaction, as has been demonstrated, deepens the problem. All of these systems recommend the same tactic: delay.”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">It is worth noting that Schulman at least accepts the occasional utility of </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">temporary </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">distance. But note that this appeal to deliberation </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">conflicts </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">with her own valorization of pressing people into verbal real-time communication over text.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">And, while we’re “handing it to ISIS”, there </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">is </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">such a phenomenon as “splitting” or “dichotomous thinking” which happens and occurs in everyone to varying degrees, across a variety of backgrounds, pathologized and not. And yes, it’s also often a dynamic with abusers; giving themselves permission to turn on a dime into one extreme emotion or another from the smallest of prompts, so their targets are left harried by constant anxiety, trying to preempt or predict the next trigger for the yelling or love-bombing. Sometimes such hot-and-cold behavior is consciously manipulative, but whether the pattern of behavior is intentional or not with a given abuser doesn’t matter.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">But, yes, splitting can </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">also </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">be a lingering inclination with people who’ve gone through trauma. The push for absolute loyalty, and violent horrified hostility to anything more nuanced, can arise from a hunger for simplicity, which all abusers share, but also </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">can </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">become reflexive for certain individuals dealing with lingering trauma and seeking safety. Indeed, many abusers </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">target and exploit </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">people prone to dichotomous thinking.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">It’s easy to see how such can be maliciously predatory </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">or </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">a coping strategy.&nbsp;</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">This duality is probably what scant substance lies underneath Schulman’s thesis, although she obviously packages it in awful terminology and sweeping liberal psychoanalytical frames which is then scaffolding for her piles of shocking abuse-apologia. But again, it’s not like there are </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">never </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">instances of the sort of dynamics she references.</span></p>
<blockquote><p><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">“When the other seems to be meeting their needs, they’re cast in the role of goodness, but when the person challenges them, their intimate becomes the villain. The inability to hold simultaneity, nuance, and shades of mutual weakness and strength”</span></i></p></blockquote>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">This is a fair enough portrayal of a thing that definitely can happen. And such </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">can </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">be a source and style of abuse. Even as a tiny child my mother would flip between a variety of perspectives towards me like tenderness and then suddenly violent castigation as “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">just another male abuser! just like your father! just like your grandfather!” </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">set off by things like my four-year-old self letting a damp towel fall to the floor. This extreme kind of reflexive black and white, all or nothing thinking can impede epistemic rationality and facilitate both individuals and social cliques falling into runaway dynamics of </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">us versus them </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">that not just overrespond to legitimately fucked shit but also incorrectly identify threats. The oppressed </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">can </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">become oppressors, those under the boot </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">can </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">use it as an excuse to abandon moral responsibilities, including that for nuanced accuracy, and much of anarchism is about addressing this danger while we struggle against our enemies in power. We burn the guillotine precisely because we are concerned about our own potential overreach or missteps in fighting our oppressors. Denying that such can happen is not a good response to CINA and will only perpetuate the way it gets its claws into people.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">But I want to be very clear here because this is tricky territory and there’s a dominant narrative around “the cycle of abuse” that portrays survivors as future abusers by default or even just more inclined to abuse. </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">This is simply not born out by the numbers.</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> A specific survivor </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">can </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">perpetuate abuse, in some cases, yes, giving themselves permission to lean into splitting, see people as threats who are not and escalate way out of bounds; but on the whole abusers do not have a background as survivors and it is far more common for survivors to be targeted and victimized again, rather than transforming into abusers themselves. Indeed the narrative that survivors are “made crazy” from their trauma is often used by predators to isolate them, just as the narrative that abuse originates from mental illness is used to shed abusers from responsibility and help them DARVO against pathologized survivors.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">And, at the same time, </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">it’s totally reasonable</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> for those who’ve survived trauma to sharply adjust their heuristics accordingly, to have at least a bit more hair-trigger response to some things. It would be </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">irrational </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">for someone attacked by a sabertooth tiger </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">not </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">to increase their estimation of the likelihood of encountering sabertooth tigers in their region. It would be an </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">irrational </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">investment of attention not to err on the side of overactive pattern-recognition when the grass rustles. Both in the senses of epistemic rationality and instrumental rationality. Moreover the bayesian adjustments made by individuals, even if actually over-adjustments in the most strict sense, can have collective benefits in social aggregate. If everyone else is still dismissive about the threat of sabertooth tigers, survivors of their prior attacks being hyper-vigilant can provide net benefits to the entire group including those underestimating the threat.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman replicates and reinforces tired narratives about survivors being irrational and childish, but it’s critical that we note </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">her prescriptions</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> to not update our beliefs on survivor testimony directly </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">oblige </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">individuals to act irrationally, against their individual interests and best knowledge or evaluation of information, deleting what they know from their brains. And this isn’t even a situation of individual rationality versus collective rationality. Aggregate interests are often served best by divergent individual strategies that are responsive to the distinct conditions and information each encounters.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The fact is there </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">are </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">black-and-white situations, there </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">are </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">individuals of immense malice and danger who are not merely mistaken but irrevocably committed to bad values. To many survivors, our experiences are an epistemic awakening to the very real cloaked presence of such predators. It is, sniff, </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">pure ideology</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> to demand people abandon their own critical cognitive capacities because you’re committed to a liberal notion that no one is truly bad at heart and everyone can be reached.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Schulman’s game, casting those who furiously object to CINA’s abuse apologia as irrational traumatized children trying to preserve a weak mental self-image through defensive black-or-white thinking is, beyond being functionally unfalsifiable, </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">itself</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> a clear example of defensive simplistic thinking.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The fact is that many people cling to “the world comes in greys, never black and white” as a defensive simplification of reality to preserve their own self-image as someone who can change and muddle moral questions to avoid responsibility. Folks become obsessive zealots against the possibility or commonality of black and white situations and, in so doing, throw passionate support behind every abuser and cryptofascist in their community in the name of </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">transformative justice,</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> precisely to avoid the kind of dangerous self-reflection Schulman claims to prioritize.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Indeed it’s </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">deeply irrational</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> to think that The Community can or should centrally (ie “collectively”) plan responses to abuse. Schulman’s fetishization of community and collective responses is </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">far worse</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> than the risks of epistemic closure among the survivor’s friends since bystanders are broadly less equipped with relevant and direct knowledge. Further, the sort of folks who leap to appoint themselves investigators and arbiters of “accountability processes” over the wishes of survivors are just soviet commissars writ small and, beyond the grotesque power dynamics, we should immediately apprehend such situations as just as fundamentally irrational as state communism. It is </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">irrational </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">to assume that a third party, much less a committee of them, will generally have better capacity to understand, evaluate and solve a situation, and it is </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">irrational </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">to elevate their goals, values, and notions of “solution” above that of a survivor. It’s </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">irrational </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">to pretend you sit in a state of pure ignorance and must personally undertake a full investigation before holding any evaluation of probability in your brain when an accusation is made.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">At least it is irrational if we presume the stated goals are indeed the goals.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">We </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">do </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">have broad moral obligations to engage with ourselves and the world around us, to struggle to avoid epistemic bubbles, to lean into some hard and painful things to learn and better ourselves. But this is</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> not at all</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> the same thing as a </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">specific </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">obligation to answer when Sarah Schulman calls.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Yes, there are reasons to be inclined towards engagement but rejecting it in specific cases – what Schulman sees as cold shouldering, shunning, etc – is in many cases </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">the only rational move</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">On numerous occasions I have, for reasons of compassion and where I calculated it could make a net positive difference, made myself available for (limited) communication with individuals who have stalked or abused me, sometimes against the urgings of all my housemates, friends, partners, etc. But there is also a clear trap to a naive or first-order consequentialist analysis: by simply escalating one’s emotional investment in me it’s always possible for someone to create a situation where the pain caused to them by my </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">not doing a thing</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> is higher than the disutility that doing it would cause me. Obsessive stalker fans can thus make themselves into utility monsters. “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">If you don’t drop everything to meet me right now I’ll kill myself</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.” “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Engage with my every question or I’ll lose my mind for weeks in anguish and rage</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.” Unless one creates and holds personal boundaries, including holding to permanent blocks, it </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">incentivizes</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> people to become emotional-investment traps whose wellbeing hangs on your every action, to exploit your empathy. This is a stark runaway failure mode, not just for the individual whose compassion is exploited, but for the entire community where this kind of manipulation via self-mutilation is productive.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">A common pattern of abuse is disrupting and monopolizing the target’s attention, </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">forcing </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">us to think about them, to empathize with them. And in the process their emotional universe consumes our own. </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">He had a bad day at work, she was abused by her dad, they fear being abandoned</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">, etc. The abuser ceases to be an individual agent and becomes merely a vast network of tugging and pulling causes. We regain a limited sense of control by uncovering these hidden causes, and we redirect our attention from direct resistance to the abuse to instead trying to negotiate or influence these external prods. </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">If only I send him to work with a better lunch, maybe he’ll weather the storm of his boss better</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. What is almost always lost in this sort of analysis is any recognition of the abuser’s own agency or potential for agency. And this facilitates them. The abuser gets to relax, to abandon any ethical pressure to diligent consideration and reasoned reflection, and instead devolve into nothing more than a billiard ball moved by other people and forces. Every impulse they have is the product of something external and there is no obligation upon them to reflect on it, much less deliberate and make a choice.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Empathy is often recognized as a characteristic of the oppressed; while our rulers often don’t have to think about us, we can be forced to think endlessly about our rulers. Even though this asymmetry of knowledge stems from their callous and confident disregard, it can be turned around and leveraged as a tool of resistance. The battered wife knows exactly how to administer the poison to her husband. The hacker knows an exploit to take down the system.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">But what can be useful as a strategy of resistance </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">individually </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">is not necessarily desirable as </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">social </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">norms or individual obligations. Nor is obsession and emotional dependence a certifier of being oppressed or in the right.</span></p>
<h3><strong>Conclusion: An Unending Curse</strong></h3>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Standing around a campfire with a couple dozen comrades as conversation turned to CINA, one of them asked, “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">Why do people always flock to the worst possible critiques of real problems? Why do they always pick the worst text and act like it invented critiquing the problem?</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” The answer, I think – beyond who has the time and capital to publish and promote full books that are academically “citable” – is just coalitional politics: A text pointing to eg the existence of folks exaggerating harm while analyzing such with nuance will draw a certain number of readers, but a text that points to that existence and also says what abusers want to hear will draw those same readers </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">plus </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">a highly motivated army of abuse apologists. Once a sufficient mass of attention is reached, a given text becomes canonical and gets handled with respect as somehow the origin of obvious things mentioned in passing. Jo Freeman invented pointing out informal power dynamics. Michel Foucault invented comparing schools to prisons. Kristian Williams invented thinking about false accusations. You’re allowed to respond, </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">but aren’t you blessed that they started the conversation.</span></i></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">I worry this same cursed and dishonest dynamic is congealing around CINA as it has taken root in liberal and non-profit spaces.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">You can say, </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">if you like some stray legitimate points Schulman mentions, find a different author or text that makes them, or fuck it, make them yourself and share that, nobody owns ideas, no need to promote an overall evil book. </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">But the response is increasingly “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">but it’s the canonical text!”</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> usually followed by attempts to claim the mantle of “nuance” by way of shirking any responsibility to take a stand. “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">You both make some interesting points! We should promote the debate! …Whoever remains most genteel wins.</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">”</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">You just want to scream.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">At the same time, just as tepid glancing touches on trivially real dynamics provides cover to Schulman’s pernicious arguments and frameworks, I also worry that CINA is so noxious, so obviously bad, that other folks will try to slap down its abuser apologia by dismissing </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">all concern</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> with dynamics of group loyalty, splitting, spiraling, bubbling, etc. This is, after all, how so much discourse goes, the counter-reaction to a narrative often slides into rejecting anything that looks like any component of its arguments. Which, in turn, fuels the complexes of those who feel like the book is a solitary torch of light in the darkness, a noble dissent against a hegemonic culture, speaking truth to power.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">But CINA is </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">not </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">a text that breaks new ground or takes real chances, its only remotely novel content is the absurd intensification of ancient abuser narratives. It says when someone draws a boundary and says “I refuse to speak to you” that is itself tantamount to abuse (or Israeli war crimes) and the other person has a right, even moral duty, to violate that boundary. Calling, messaging, physically stalking, harassing any mutuals, sealioning in their mentions, anything to force the other person to come to the table. You are even obliged to do this as a bystander to someone else drawing a boundary, in fact The Community must come together to ensure escape is impossible. You are obliged to do this because individuals cannot be allowed autonomy in their self-reflection and you, with a crude psychoanalytic just-so-story, surely know better than them when they are making a mistake or turning away from engagement with reality.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The ideology of domination is absolutely founded in a drive for stasis and isolation. Power – at every scale – is about reducing complexity in the world, simplifying to what can be controlled, what can be made rigid. The drive for power is deeply tied to a fear of the complexity created by other people having choices and thinking for themselves. Nationalism is a great expression of this: violently slicing through the complex tangle of actually existing human relationships and creating prisons in which to contain people, limiting their choice in possible relationships.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">But </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">so too</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> is forced contact between individuals and elevating a Relationship or Community above individual choice. The abuser cannot stand their target thinking their own thoughts or living their own life, as such creates space for dangerous unknown possibilities. The abuser must interject and interrupt, make it impossible for a train of thought or existence to take flight away from their control. They often emotionally escalate or engage in other communicative strategies that demand further communication, until they can force their target to become preoccupied with them.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">This hunger for real time contact is often righteously framed as a drive for honesty through directness, but </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">rawness </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">is not the same thing as </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">honesty</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">. The process of compressing our thoughts into words and then someone else unzipping those words into conceptual relations in their own brain requires active reflection and deliberation to achieve accuracy. Bypassing that for an immediate rawness can only mean a breakdown in the fidelity of the information transmitted, which reduces the agency of both individuals.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">The other individual, in trying to get distance or enforce a defensive boundary, including permanent ones and even catalyzing social boycotts, is trying to create a world where they can think about something other than whatever the abuser is likely to do next and whatever is going on in their mind. Yes, the drawing of such boundaries involves the curtailment or severing of </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">specific </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">lines of engagement but they’re trying to create net possibility rather than strangle it.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">But, sadly, many leftists dream </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">not</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;"> of a liberated world of infinite expanding possibility but of the reassurances of fixed Community. Capitalism appears to them primarily as an atomizing force that creates precarity and anxiety and so they focus on visions of a world where everything is more or less assured. Their core motivation is thus a hunger for </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">permanence </span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">rather than </span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">choice</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">Combine this with liberal delusions that talking and the magic of “</span><i><span style="font-weight: 400;">looking into one another’s eyes</span></i><span style="font-weight: 400;">” can solve any problem and what results is an ideology that cannot accept unresolved conflict, that compulsively cannot respect unilateral decisions to refuse to talk, and so makes every split worse.</span></p>
<p><span style="font-weight: 400;">I’ve spent the better part of two decades viciously critiquing the frameworks and instincts of right-libertarians, in particular the notion of rights and negative freedom. But they’re not wrong that norms and defaults of defensive individual boundaries are important. They’re not wrong that power should be abolished rather than democratized. CINA is a case study in the horrors of the opposite direction.</span></p>
